# Data-Visualization


Development and evaluation of methods to visualise Airlines Delays using various visualization techniques.


Data is free but the information hidden inside this data is priceless. Various visualization techniques are applied on a massively huge Airlines dataset to answer various business queries concerning flight delays like cause of delay and forecasting future delays. Dataset used for this analysis consist of flight transactions, flight routes information with around 7 million records and 2 GB in size. A picture is worth thousand words and reading a picture can trigger a number of thoughts such as extracting, comparing or aggregating numerical values. Most of the charts that are presented in this report will trigger some of these thoughts. Results are represented in the form of dashboard and story. There is also a demonstration of comparative analysis using different types of technologies.

Date is downloaded as csv file from Bureau of Transportation Statistics(http://stat-computing.org/dataexpo/2009/the-data.html). This csv file if loaded into Hadoop distributed file system HDFS initially. Then the data was loaded into HIVE, where explorative analysis was done on the acquired dataset. This dataset has 7009728 records, analysing all these 7 million records in any dashboard can lead to saviour performance issue on the dashboard. It was decided to segment this data into small tables based on the insights found in this dataset.  HIVE was chosen for explorative analysis. Results of explorative analysis are discussed.

Tools used

1.	HDFS is used to host the csv file from the web.
2.	HIVE is used to load the csv file into tables and segment this data into different tables. Hive was used to leverage Hadoop MapReduce parallel processing capability in order process fast queries on this massively large dataset.
3.	Tableau for visual representation.
4.	R was used for statistical analysis. RHIVE package used to lift data from HIVE data warehouse into R server. – Although R server crashed many times due to the size of the dataset loaded.
5.	Tableau with R is used to do predictive analysis.

Some interesting golden rules to follow while designing dashboard, these are: 

1.	Prioritize through positioning: A dashboard displays data through charts and gaug-es, but not all data is equally important. Certain data might be extremely important and it might be that the rest of the information that is displayed on the dashboard can only be comprehended if this data is analysed first. Under such circumstances a dashboard designer must position the important chart to the top-left corner of the dashboard, since this region receives the preliminary attention of a viewer (F-Shaped Pattern).
2.	Facilitate comparative analysis: In case you have two charts that are meant to be contrasted, then it is best to arrange them side by side. This arrangement signifies the need for comparison.
3.	Customize chart scale for optimal data presentation: Sometimes the data dis-played on a chart has a very narrow range. This makes the task of analysing the data a lot difficult. Such situations call for manipulation of the chart scale. The chart scale should be adjusted so that, its lower limit and upper limit are close to the lower and upper limit of the data range. This adjustment will help in accentuating the ups and downs of the plotted data, thereby making analysis easier.
4.	Appropriate selection of charts: For maximum impact, it is essential that you choose the right chart for you data. The pie chart is often used inappropriately. A pie chart is actually meant for plotting percentages but, it is sometimes used for plotting non-percentage data such as sales, revenue, quantity etc.
5.	Proper formatting of numbers: It doesn't make sense to have a chart that displays numbers with unnecessary accuracy. If the chart is cluttered with very large num-bers. So, it is best to restrict the number of decimal places to 1 or 2. And, scale large numbers by defining a proper scaling parameter. The K,M scale can be applied to fi-nancial charts to scale down numbers which are greater than thousand and million.
6.	Data-Ink ratio: The Data-Ink ratio is a concept introduced by Edward Tufte in 1983. The data-ink ratio is the proportion of Ink that is used to present actual data com-pared to the total amount of ink (or pixels) used in the entire display. Good graphics should include only data-Ink. Non-Data-Ink is to be deleted everywhere where possi-ble. The reason for this is to avoid drawing the attention of viewers of the data presentation to irrelevant elements. The goal is to design a display with the highest possible data-ink ratio without eliminating something that is necessary for effective communication [2].
7.	Chartjunk:  The term chartjunk was also coined by Edward Tufte in 1983. Chartjunk is a term for unnecessary or confusing visual elements in charts and graphs. Markings and visual elements can be called chartjunk if they are not part of the minimum set of visuals necessary to communicate the information understanda-bly. Examples of unnecessary elements which might be called chartjunk include heavy or dark grid lines, ornamented chart axes and display frames, pictures or icons within data graphs, and ornamental shading [3].
8.	Overlay Types: Kong & Agrawal in 2012 introduce graphical overlays—visual elements that are layered onto charts to facilitate a larger set of chart reading tasks. These overlays directly support the lower-level perceptual and cognitive processes that viewers must perform to read a chart. Five main types of overlays are (1) reference structures such as gridlines, (2) highlights such as outlines around important marks, (3) redundant encodings such as numerical data labels, (4) summary statistics such as the mean or max and (5) annotations such as descriptive text for context [1].

